Sun exposure. Exposure to ultraviolet (UV) radiation from the sun plays a major role in the development of skin cancer. People who live at high altitudes or in areas with bright sunlight year-round have a higher risk of developing skin cancer. People who spend a lot of time outside during the midday hours also have a higher risk. Recreational suntanning should be avoided to reduce the risk of skin cancer.

Exposure to ultraviolet type B (UVB) radiation appears to be more closely linked with skin cancer, but newer research suggests that ultraviolet type A (UVA) may also play a role in the development of basal cell carcinoma, squamous cell carcinoma, and melanoma. UVB radiation causes sunburn and does not penetrate car windows or other types of glass. However, UVA can pass through glass and may cause aging and wrinkling of the skin in addition to skin cancer. Therefore, it is important to protect your skin from both UVA and UVB radiation (see “Prevention” below).

Weakened or suppressed immune system. People with a weakened immune system due to a bone marrow/stem cell transplant, organ transplant, or diseases such as HIV/AIDS and certain types of leukemia have a higher risk of developing skin cancer, particularly squamous cell carcinoma. People taking immunosuppressive drugs have the same higher risk.

Indoor tanning. People who use tanning beds, tanning parlors, or sun lamps have an increased risk of developing all types of skin cancer. There is no safe amount of indoor tanning. Any use of indoor tanning devices increases the risk of skin cancer, including melanoma, and this risk increases with more use of indoor tanning.

Fair skin. People with a fair complexion, blond or red hair, blue eyes, and freckles are at increased risk for developing skin cancer. People whose skin has a tendency to burn rather than tan also have an increased risk. Despite this, all people, regardless of skin color, are at risk for developing skin cancer.

Race/ethnicity. White people are most likely to develop Merkel cell cancer; however, some black people and people of Polynesian descent develop the disease.

Precancerous skin conditions. Rough, red, or brown scaly patches on the skin, called actinic keratoses or Bowen's disease, are usually more common in areas exposed to the sun. These areas can change into squamous cell cancers in a small number of people. The more actinic keratoses a person has, the higher the risk that they will develop a squamous cell carcinoma. Using a broad-spectrum sunscreen throughout the year that protects against both UVA and UVB radiation and has a sun protection factor (SPF) of 30 or more helps decrease the risk of developing actinic keratoses. See the "Prevention" section below for more information about protecting your skin from the sun.